<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Balloon Tree</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Balloon Tree</h2>
			<header>
				<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
			</header>
			<p>The colonel said:</p>
			<p>We rode for several hours straight from the shore toward the heart of the island. The sun was low in the western sky when we left the ship. Neither on the water nor on the land had we felt a breath of air stirring. The glare was upon everything. Over the low range of hills miles away in the interior hung a few copper-colored clouds. “Wind,” said Briery. Kilooa shook his head.</p>
			<p>Vegetation of all kinds showed the effects of the long continued drought. The eye wandered without relief from the sickly russet of the undergrowth, so dry in places that leaves and stems crackled under the horses” feet, to the yellowish-brown of the thirsty trees that skirted the bridle path. No growing thing was green except the bell-top cactus, fit to flourish in the crater of a living volcano.</p>
			<p>Kilooa leaned over in the saddle and tore from one of these plants its top, as big as a California pear and bloated with juice. He crushed the bell in his fist, and, turning, flung into our hot faces a few grateful drops of water.</p>
			<p>Then the guide began to talk rapidly in his language of vowels and liquids. Briery translated for my benefit.</p>
			<p>The god Lalala loved a woman of the island. He came in the form of fire. She, accustomed to the ordinary temperature of the clime, only shivered before his approaches. Then he wooed her as a shower of rain and won her heart. Kakal was a divinity much more powerful than Lalala, but malicious to the last degree. He also coveted this woman, who was very beautiful. Kakal’s importunities were in vain. In spite, he changed her to a cactus, and rooted her to the ground under the burning sun. The god Lalala was powerless to avert this vengeance; but he took up his abode with the cactus woman, still in the form of a rain shower, and never left her, even in the driest seasons. Thus it happens that the bell-top cactus is an unfailing reservoir of pure cool water.</p>
			<p>Long after dark we reached the channel of a vanished stream, and Kilooa led us for several miles along its dry bed. He tethered the panting horses and then dashed into the dense thicket on the bank. A hundred yards of scrambling, and we came to a poor thatched hut. The savage raised both hands above his head and uttered a musical falsetto, not unlike the yodel peculiar to the Valais. This call brought out the occupant of the hut, upon whom Briery flashed the light of his lantern. It was an old woman, hideous beyond the imagination of a dyspeptic’s dream.</p>
			<p><em>“Omanana gelaãl!”</em> exclaimed Kilooa.</p>
			<p>“Hail, holy woman,” translated Briery.</p>
			<p>Between Kilooa and the holy hag there ensued a long colloquy, respectful on his part, sententious and impatient on hers. Briery listened with eager attention. Several times he clutched my arm, as if unable to repress his anxiety. The woman seemed to be persuaded by Kilooa’s arguments, or won by his entreaties. At last she pointed toward the southeast, slowly pronouncing a few words that apparently satisfied my companions.</p>
			<p>The direction indicated by the holy woman was still toward the hills, but twenty or thirty degrees to the left of the general course which we had pursued since Jeaving the shore.</p>
			<p>“Push on! Push on!” cried Briery. “We can afford to lose no time.”</p>
			<header>
				<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
			</header>
			<p>We rode all right. At sunrise there was a pause of hardly ten minutes for the scanty breakfast supplied by our haversacks. Then we were again in the saddle, making our way through a thicket that grew more and more difficult, and under a sun that grew hotter.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” I remarked finally to my taciturn friend, “you have no objection to telling me now why two civilized beings and one amiable savage should he plunging through this infernal jungle, as if they were on an errand of life or death?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said he, “it is best you should know.”</p>
			<p>Briery produced from an inner breast pocket a letter which had been read and reread until it was worn in the creases. “This,” he went on, “is from Professor Quakversuch of the University of Upsala. It reached me in Valparaiso.”</p>
			<p>Glancing cautiously around, as if he feared that every tree fern in that tropical wilderness was an eavesdropper, or that the hoodlike spathes of the giant caladiums overhead were ears waiting to drink in some mighty secret of science, Briery read in a low voice from the letter of the great Swedish botanist:</p>
			<p>“You will have in these islands,” wrote the professor, “a rare opportunity to investigate certain extraordinary accounts given me years ago by the Jesuit missionary Buteaux concerning the Migratory Tree, the <i epub:type="se:name.genus">cereus vagrans</i> of Jansenius and other speculative physiologists.</p>
			<p>“The explorer Spohr claims to have beheld it; but there is some reason, as you know, for accepting all of Spohr’s statements with caution.</p>
			<p>“That is not the case with the assertions of my late valued correspondent, the Jesuit missionary.</p>
			<p>Father Buteaux was a learned botanist, an accurate observer, and a most pious and conscientious man. He never saw the Migratory Tree; but during the long periods of his labors in that part of the world he accumulated, from widely different sources, a mass of testimony as to its existence and habits.</p>
			<p>“Is it quite inconceivable, my dear Briery, that somewhere in the range of nature there is a vegetable organization as far above the cabbage, let us say, in complexity and potentiality as the ape is above the polyp? Nature is continuous. In all her schemes we find no chasms, no gaps.</p>
			<p>There may be missing links in our books and classifications and cabinets, but there are none in the organic world. Is not all of lower nature struggling upward to arrive at the point of self-consciousness and volition? In the unceasing process of evolution, differentiation, improvement in special functions, why may not a plant arrive at this point and feel, will, act, in short, possess and exercise the characteristics of the true animal?”</p>
			<p>Briery’s voice trembled with enthusiasm as he read this.</p>
			<p>“I have no doubt,” continued Professor Quakversuch, “that if it shall be your great good fortune to encounter a specimen of the Migratory Tree described by Buteaus, you will find that it possesses a well-defined system of real nerves and ganglia, constituting, in fact, the seat of vegetable intelligence. I conjure you to be very thorough in your dissections.</p>
			<p>“According to the indications furnished me by the Jesuit, this extraordinary tree should belong to the order of <i epub:type="se:name.genus">Cactaceae</i>. It should be developed only in conditions of extreme heat arid dryness. Its roots should be hardly more than rudimentary, affording a precarious attachment to the earth. This attachment it should be able to sever at will, soaring up into the air and away to another place selected by itself, as a bird shifts its habitation. I infer that these migrations are</p>
			<p>accomplished by means of the property of secreting hydrogen gas, with which it inflates at pleasure a bladder-like organ of highly elastic tissue, thus lifting itself out of the ground and off to a new abode.</p>
			<p>“Buteaux added that the Migratory Tree was invariably worshipped by the natives as a supernatural being, and that the mystery thrown by them around its cult was the greatest obstacle in the path of the investigator.”</p>
			<p>“There!” exclaimed Briery, folding up Professor Quakversuch’s letter. “Is that not a quest worthy the risk or sacrifice of life itself!? To add to the recorded facts of vegetable morphology the proved existence of a tree that wanders, a tree that wills, a tree, perhaps, that thinks⁠—this is glory to be won at any cost! The lamented Decandolle of Geneva⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Confound the lamented Decandolle of Geneva!” shouted I, for it was excessively hot, and I felt that we had come on a fool’s errand.</p>
			<header>
				<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
			</header>
			<p>It was near sunset on the second day of our journey, when Kilooa, who was riding several rods in advance of us, uttered a quick cry, leaped from his saddle, and stooped to the ground.</p>
			<p>Briery was at his side in an instant. I followed with less agility; my joints were very stiff, and I had no scientific enthusiasm to lubricate them. Briery was on his hands and knees, eagerly examining what seemed to be a recent disturbance in the soil. The savage was prostrate, rubbing his forehead in the dust, as if in a religious ecstasy, and warbling the same falsetto notes that we had heard at the holy woman’s hut.</p>
			<p>“What beast’s trail have you struck?” I demanded.</p>
			<p>“The trail of no beast,” answered Briery, almost angrily. “Do you see this broad round abrasion of the surface, where a heavy weight has rested? Do you see these little troughs in the fresh earth, radiating from the center like the points of a star? They are the scars left by slender roots torn up from their shallow beds. Do you see Kilooa’s hysterical performance? I tell you we are on the track of the Sacred Tree. It has been here, and not long ago.”</p>
			<p>Acting under Briery’s excited instructions, we continued the hunt on foot. Kilooa started toward the east, I toward the west, and Briery took the southward course.</p>
			<p>To cover the ground thoroughly, we agreed to advance in gradually widening zigzags, communicating with each other at intervals by pistol shots. There could have been no more foolish arrangement. In a quarter of an hour I had lost my head and my bearings in a thicket. For another quarter of an hour I discharged my revolver repeatedly, without getting a single response from east or south. I spent the remainder of daylight in a blundering effort to make my way back to the place where the horses were; and then the sun went down, leaving me in sudden darkness, alone in a wilderness of the extent and character of which I had not the faintest idea.</p>
			<p>I will spare you the history of my sufferings during the whole of that night, and the next day, and the next night, and another day. When it was dark I wandered about in blind despair, longing for daylight, not daring to sleep or even to stop, and in continual terror of the unknown dangers that surrounded me. In the daytime I longed for night, for the sun scorched its way through the thickest roof that the luxuriant foliage afforded, and drove me nearly mad. The provisions in my haversack were exhausted. My canteen was on my saddle; I should have died of thirst had it not been for the bell-top cactus, which I found twice. But in that horrible experience neither the torture of hunger and thirst nor the torture of heat equaled the misery of the thought that my life was to be sacrificed to the delusion of a crazy botanist, who had dreamed of the impossible.</p>
			<p>The impossible?</p>
			<p>On the second afternoon, still staggering aimlessly on through the jungle, I lost my last strength and fell to the ground. Despair and indifference had long since given way to an eager desire for the end. I closed my eyes with indescribable relief; the hot sun seemed pleasant on my face as consciousness departed.</p>
			<p>Did a beautiful and gentle woman come to me while I lay unconscious, and take my head in her lap, and put her arms around me? Did she press her face to mine and in a whisper bid me have courage? That was the belief that filled my mind when it struggled back for a moment into consciousness; I clutched at the warm, soft arms, and swooned again.</p>
			<p>Do not look at each other and smile, gentlemen; in that cruel wilderness, in my helpless condition, I found pity and benignant tenderness. The next time my senses returned I saw that Something <em>was</em> bending over me⁠—something majestic if not beautiful, humane if not human, gracious if not woman. The arms that held me and drew me up were moist, and they throbbed with the pulsation of life. There was a faint, sweet odor, like the smell of a woman’s perfumed hair. The touch was a caress, the clasp an embrace.</p>
			<p>Can I describe its form? No, not with the definiteness that would satisfy the Quakversuches and the Brierys. I saw that the trunk was massive. The branches that lifted me from the ground and held me carefully and gently were flexible and symmetrically disposed. Above my head there was a wreath of strange foliage, and in the midst of it a dazzling sphere of scarlet. The scarlet globe grew while I watched it, but the effort of watching was too much for me.</p>
			<p>Remember, if you please, that at this time, physical exhaustion and mental torture had brought me to the point where I passed to and fro between consciousness and unconsciousness as easily and as frequently as one fluctuates between slumber and wakefulness during a night of fever. It seemed the most natural thing in the world that in my extreme weakness I should be beloved and cared for by a cactus. I did not seek an explanation of this good fortune, or try to analyze it; I simply accepted it as a matter of course, as a child accepts a benefit from an unexpected quarter.</p>
			<p>The one idea that possessed me was that I had found an unknown friend, instinct with womanly sympathy and immeasurably kind.</p>
			<p>And as night came on it seemed to me that the scarlet bulb overhead became enormously distended, so that it almost filled the sky. Was I gently rocked by the supple arms that still held me? Were we floating off together into the air? I did not know, or care. Now I fancied that I was in my berth on board ship, cradled by the swell of the sea; now, that I was sharing the flight of some great bird; now, that I was borne on with prodigious speed through the darkness by my own volition. The sense of incessant motion affected all my dreams. Whenever I awoke I felt a cool breeze steadily beating against my face⁠—the first breath of air since we had landed. I was vaguely happy, gentlemen. I had surrendered all responsibility for my own fate. I had gained the protection of a being of superior powers.</p>
			<header>
				<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
			</header>
			<p>“The brandy flask, Kilooa!”</p>
			<p>It was daylight. I lay upon the ground and Briery was supporting my shoulders. In his face was a look of bewilderment that I shall never forget.</p>
			<p>“My God!” he cried, “and how did you get here? We gave up the search two days ago.”</p>
			<p>The brandy pulled me together. I staggered to my feet and looked around. The cause of Briery’s extreme amazement was apparent at a glance. We were not in the wilderness. We wereat the shore. There was the bay, and the ship at anchor, half a mile off. They were already lowering a boat to send for us.</p>
			<p>And there to the south was a bright red spot on the horizon, hardly larger than the morning star⁠—the Balloon Tree returning to the wilderness. I saw it, Briery saw it, the savage Kilooa saw it. We watched it till it vanished. We watched it with very different emotions, Kilooa with superstitious reverence, Briery with scientific interest and intense disappointment, I with a heart full of wonder and gratitude.</p>
			<p>I clasped my forehead with both hands. It was no dream, then. The Tree, the caress, the embrace, the scarlet bulb, the night journey through the air were not creations and incidents of delirium. Call it tree, or call it plant-animal⁠—there it was! Let men of science quarrel over the question of its existence in nature; this I know: <em>It had found me dying and had brought me more than a hundred miles straight to the ship where I belonged.</em> Under Providence, gentlemen, that sentient and intelligent vegetable organism had saved my life.</p>
			<p>At this point the colonel got up and left the club. He was very much moved. Pretty soon Briery came in, briskly as usual. He picked up an uncut copy of Lord Bragmuch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in Kerguellon’s Land</i>, and settled himself in an easy chair at the corner of the fireplace.</p>
			<p>Young Traddies timidly approached the veteran globetrotter. “Excuse me, Mr. Briery,” he said,</p>
			<p>“but I should like to ask you a question about the Balloon Tree. Were there scientific reasons for believing that its sex was⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah,” interrupted Briery, looking bored; “the colonel has been favoring you with that extraordinary narrative? Has he honored me again with a share in the adventure? Yes? Well, did we bag the game this time?”</p>
			<p>“Why, no,” said young Traddies. “You last saw the Tree as a scarlet spot against the horizon.”</p>
			<p>“By Jove, another miss!” said Briery, calmly beginning to cut the leaves of his book.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
