<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Devilish Rat</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Devilish Rat</h2>
			<p>You know that when a man lives in a deserted castle on the top of a great mountain by the side of the river Rhine, he is liable to misrepresentation. Half the good people of the village of Schwinkenschwank, including the burgomaster and the burgomaster’s nephew, believed that I was a fugitive from American justice.</p>
			<p>The other half were just as firmly convinced that I was crazy, and this theory had the support of the notary’s profound knowledge of human character and acute logic.</p>
			<p>The two halves to the interesting controversy were so equally matched that they spent all their time in confronting each other’s arguments, and I was left, happily, pretty much to myself.</p>
			<p>As everybody with the slightest pretension to cosmopolitan knowledge is already aware, the old Schloss Schwinkenschwank is haunted by the ghosts of twenty-nine mediaeval barons and baronesses. The behavior of these ancient spectres was very considerate. They annoyed me, on the whole, far less than the rats, which swarmed in great numbers in every part of the castle.</p>
			<p>When I first took possession of my quarters, I was obliged to keep a lantern burning all night, and continually to beat about me with a wooden club in order to escape the fate of Bishop Hatto.</p>
			<p>Afterward I sent to Frankfort and had made for me a wire cage in which I was able to sleep with comfort and safety as soon as I became accustomed to the sharp gritting of the rats” teeth as they gnawed the iron in their impotent attempts to get in and eat me.</p>
			<p>Barring the spectres and the rats, and now and then a transient bat or owl, I was the first tenant of the Schloss Schwinkenschwank for three or four centuries.</p>
			<p>After leaving Bonn, where I had greatly profited by the learned and ingenious lectures of the famous Calcarius, Herr Professor of Metaphysical Science in that admirable university, I had selected this ruin as the best possible place for the trial of a certain experiment in psychology.</p>
			<p>The Hereditary Landgraf, von Toplitz, who owned Schloss Schwinkenschwank, showed no signs of surprise when I went to him and offered six thalers a month for the privilege of lodging in his ramshackle castle. The clerk of a hotel could not have taken my application more coolly or my money in a more business-like spirit.</p>
			<p>“It will be necessary to pay the first month’s rent in advance,” said he.</p>
			<p>“That I am fortunately prepared to do, my well-born Hereditary Landgraf,” I replied, counting out six thalers. He pocketed them, and gave me a receipt for the same. I wondered whether he ever tried to collect rent from his ghosts.</p>
			<p>The most inhabitable room in the castle was that in the northwest tower, but it was already occupied by the Lady Adelaide Maria, eldest daughter of the Baron von Schotten, who was starved to death in the thirteenth century by her affectionate papa for refusing to wed a one-legged freebooter from over the river.</p>
			<p>As I could not think of intruding upon a lady, I took up my quarters at the head of the south turret stairway, where there was nobody in possession except a sentimental monk, who was out a good deal nights and gave me no trouble at any time.</p>
			<p>In such calm seclusion as I enjoyed in the Schloss it is possible to reduce physical and mental activity to the lowest degree consistent with life. Saint Pedro of Alcantara, who passed forty years in a convent cell, schooled himself to sleep only an hour and a half a day, and to take food but once in three days.</p>
			<p>While diminishing the functions of his body to such an extent, he must also, I firmly believe, have reduced his soul almost to the negative character of an unconscious infant’s. It is exercise, thought, friction, activity, that brings out the individuality of a man’s nature. Prof. Calcanus’s pregnant words remained burned into my memory:</p>
			<p>“What is the mysterious link that binds soul to the living body? Why am I Calcarius, or rather why does the soul called Calcarius inhabit this particular organism? (Here the learned professor slapped his enormous thigh with his pudgy hand.) Might not I as easily be another, and might not another be I? Loosen the individualized Ego from the fleshy surroundings to which it coheres by force of habit and by reason of long contact, and who shall say that it may not be expelled by an act of volition, leaving the living body receptive, to be occupied by some non-individualized Ego, worthier and better than the old?”</p>
			<p>This profound suggestion made a lasting impression upon my mind. While perfectly satisfied with my body, which is sound, healthy, and reasonably beautiful, I had long been discontented with my soul, and constant contemplation of its weakness, its grossness, its inadequacy, had intensified discontentment to disgust.</p>
			<p>Could I but escape myself, could I but tear this paste diamond from its fine casket and replace it with a genuine jewel, what sacrifices would I not consent to, and how fervently would I bless Calcarius and the hour that took me to Bonn!</p>
			<p>It was to try this untried experiment that I shut myself up in the Schloss Schwinkenschwank.</p>
			<p>Excepting little Hans, the innkeeper’s son, who climbed the mountain three times a week from the village to bring me bread and cheese and white wine, and afterward Hans” sister, my only visitor during the period of my retirement was Professor Calcarius. He came over from Bonn twice to cheer and encourage me.</p>
			<p>On the occasion of his first visit night fell while we were still talking of Pythagoras and metempsychosis. The profound metaphysicist was a corpulent man and very short-sighted.</p>
			<p>“I can never get down the hill alive,” he cried, wringing his hands anxiously. “I should stumble, and, Gott im Himmel, precipitate myself peradventure upon some jagged rock.”</p>
			<p>“You must stay all night, Professor,” said I, “and sleep with me in my wire cage. I should like you to meet my room mate, the monk.”</p>
			<p>“Subjective entirely, my dear young friend,” he said. “Your apparition is a creature of the optic nerve and I shall contemplate it without alarm, as becomes a philosopher.”</p>
			<p>I put my Herr Professor to bed in the wire cage and with extreme difficulty crowded myself in by his side. At his especial request I left the lantern burning. “Not that I have any apprehension of your subjective spectres,” he explained. “Mere figments of the brain they are. But in the dark I might roll over and crush you.”</p>
			<p>“How progresses the self-suppression?” he asked at length⁠—“the subordination of the individual soul? Eh! What was that?”</p>
			<p>“A rat, trying to get in at us,” I replied. “Be calm: you are in no peril. My experiment proceeds satisfactorily. I have quite eliminated all interest in the outside world. Love, gratitude, friendship, care for my own welfare and the welfare of my friends have nearly disappeared. Soon, I hope, memory will also fade away, and with my memory my individual past.”</p>
			<p>“You are doing splendidly!” he exclaimed with enthusiasm, “and rendering to psychologic science an inestimable service. Soon your psychic nature will be a blank, a vacuum, ready to receive⁠—God preserve me! What was that?”</p>
			<p>“Only the screech of an owl,” said I, reassuringly, as the great grey bird with which I had become familiar fluttered noisily down through an aperture in the roof and lit upon the top of ourwire cage.</p>
			<p>Calcarius regarded the owl with interest, and the owl blinked gravely at Calcarius.</p>
			<p>“Who knows,” said the Herr Professor, “but what that owl is animated by the soul of some great dead philosopher? Perhaps Pythagoras, perhaps Plotinus, perhaps the spirit of Socrates himself, abides temporarily beneath those feathers.”</p>
			<p>I confessed that some such idea had already occurred to me.</p>
			<p>“And in that case,” continued the Professor, “you have only to negate your own nature, to nullify your own individuality, in order to receive into your body this great soul, which, as my intuitions tell me, is that of Socrates, and is hovering around your physical organization, hoping to effect an entrance. Persist, my worthy young student, in your most laudable experiment, and metaphysical science⁠—Merciful Heaven! Is that the devil?”</p>
			<p>It was the huge gray rat, my nightly visitor. This hideous creature had grown in his life, perhaps of a century, to the size of a small terrier. His whiskers were perfectly white and very thick. His immense tusks had become so long that they curved over till the points almost impaled his skull. His eyes were big and blood red. The corners of his upper lip were so shrivelled and drawn up that his countenance wore an expression of diabolical malignity, rarely seen except in some human faces.</p>
			<p>He was too old and knowing to gnaw at the wires; but he sat outside on his haunches, and gazed in at us with an indescribable look of hatred. My companion shivered. After a while the rat turned away, rattled his callous tail across the wire netting, and disappeared in the darkness.</p>
			<p>Professor Calcarius breathed a deep sigh of relief, and soon was snoring so profoundly that neither owls, rats, nor spectres ventured near us till morning.</p>
			<p>I had so far succeeded in merging my intellectual and moral qualities in the routine of mere animal existence that when it was time for Calcarius to come again, as he had promised, I felt little interest in his approaching visit. Hansel, who constituted my commissariat, had been taken sick of the measles, and I was dependent for my food and wine upon the coming of his pretty sister Emma, a flaxen-haired maiden of eighteen, who climbed the steep path with the grace and agility of a gazelle.</p>
			<p>She was an artless little thing, and told me of her own accord the story of her simple love.</p>
			<p>Fritz was a soldier in the Emperor Wilhelm’s army. He was now in garrison at Cologne. They hoped that he would soon get a lieutenancy, for he was brave and faithful, and then he would come home and marry her.</p>
			<p>She had saved up her dairy money till it amounted to quite a little purse, which she had sent him that it might help purchase his commission. Had I ever seen Fritz? No? He was handsome and good, and she loved him more than she could tell.</p>
			<p>I listened to this prattle with the same amount of romantic interest that a proposition in Euclid would excite, and congratulated myself that my old soul had so nearly disappeared.</p>
			<p>Every night the gray owl perched above me. I knew that Socrates was waiting to take possession of my body, and I yearned to open my bosom and receive that grand soul.</p>
			<p>Every night the detestable rat came and peered through the wires. His cool, contemptuous malice exasperated me strangely. I longed to reach out from beneath my cage and seize and throttle him, but I was afraid of the venom of his bite.</p>
			<p>My own soul had by this time nearly wasted away through disciplined disuse. The owl looked down lovingly at me with his great placid eyes. A noble spirit seemed to shine through them and to say, “I will come when you are ready.” And I would look back into their lustrous depths andexclaim with infinite yearning, “Come soon O Socrates, for I am almost ready!”</p>
			<p>Then I would turn and meet the devilish gaze of the monstrous rat, whose sneering malevolence dragged me back to earth and to earth’s concerns.</p>
			<p>My detestation of the abominable beast was the sole lingering trace of the old nature. When he was not by, my soul seemed to hover around and above my body, ready to take wing and leave it free forever. At his appearance, an unconquerable disgust and loathing undid in a second all that had been accomplished, and I was still myself. To succeed in my experiment I felt that the hateful creature whose presence barred out the grand old philosopher’s soul must be dispatched at any cost of sacrifice or danger.</p>
			<p>“I will kill you, you loathsome animal!” I shouted to the rat, “and then to my emancipated body will come the soul of Socrates which awaits me yonder.”</p>
			<p>The rat turned on me his leering eyes and grinned more sardonically than ever. His scorn was more than I could bear. I threw up the side of the wire cage and clutched desperately at my enemy.</p>
			<p>I caught him by the tail. I drew him close to me. I crunched the bones of his slimy legs, felt blindly for his head, and when I got both hands to his neck, fastened upon his life with a terrible grip.</p>
			<p>With all the strength at my command, and with all the recklessness of a desperate purpose, I tore and twisted the flesh of my loathsome victim. He gasped, uttered a horrible cry of wild pain, and at last lay limp and quiet in my clutch. Hate was satisfied, my last passion was at an end, and I was free to welcome Socrates.</p>
			<p>When I awoke from a long and dreamless sleep, the events of the night before and, indeed, of my whole previous life were as the dimly remembered incidents in a story read years ago.</p>
			<p>The owl was gone but the mangled corpse of the rat lay by my side. Even in death his face wore its horrible grin. It now looked like a Satanic smile of triumph.</p>
			<p>I arose and shook off my drowsiness. A new life seemed to tingle in my veins. I was no longer indifferent and negative. I took a lively interest in my surroundings and wanted to be out in the world among men, to plunge into affairs and exult in action.</p>
			<p>Pretty Emma came up the hill bringing her basket. “I am going to leave you,’~ said I. “I shall seek better quarters than the Schloss Schwinkenschwank.”</p>
			<p>“And shall you go to Cologne,” she eagerly asked; “to the garrison where the emperor”s’soldiers are?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps so⁠—on my way to the world.”</p>
			<p>“And will you go for me to Fritz?” she continued, blushing. “I have good news to send him.</p>
			<p>His uncle, the mean old notary, died last night. Fritz now has a small fortune and he must come home to me at once.”</p>
			<p>“The notary,” said I slowly, “died last night?”</p>
			<p>“Yes sir; and they say he is black in the face this morning. But it is good news for Fritz and me.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” continued I, still more slowly⁠—’perhaps Fritz would not believe me. I am a stranger, and men who know the world, like your young soldier, are given to suspicion.”</p>
			<p>“Carry this ring,” she quickly replied, taking from her finger a worthless trinket. “Fritz gave it to me and he will know by it that I trust you.”</p>
			<p>My next visitor was the learned Calcarius. He was quite out of breath when he reached the apartment I was preparing to leave.</p>
			<p>“How goes our metempsychosis, my worthy pupil?” he asked. “I arrived last evening fromBonn, but rather than spend another night with your horrible rodents, I submitted my purse to the extortion of the village innkeeper. The rogue swindled me,” he continued taking out his purse and counting over a small treasure of silver. “He charged me forty groschen for a bed and breakfast.”</p>
			<p>The sight of the silver, and the sweet clink of the pieces as they came in contact in Professor Calcarius’s palm, thrilled my new soul with an emotion it had not yet experienced.</p>
			<p>Silver seemed the brightest thing in the world to me at that moment, and the acquisition of silver, by whatever means, the noblest exercise of human energy. With a sudden impulse that I was unable to resist, I sprang upon my friend and instructor and wrenched the purse from his hands. He uttered a cry of surprise and dismay.</p>
			<p>“Cry away!” I shouted; “it will do no good. Your miserly screams will be heard only by rats and owls and ghosts. The money is mine.”</p>
			<p>“What’s this?” he exclaimed. “You rob your guest, your friend, your guide and mentor in the sublime walks of metaphysical science? What perfidy has taken possession of your soul?”</p>
			<p>I seized the Herr Professor by the legs and threw him violently to the floor. He struggled as the grey rat had struggled. I tore pieces of wire from my cage, and bound him hand and foot so tightly that the wire cut deep into his fat flesh.</p>
			<p>“Ho! Ho!” said I, standing over him; “what a feast for the rats your corpulent carcass will make,” and I turned to go.</p>
			<p>“Good Gott!” he cried. “You do not intend to leave me: no one ever comes here.”</p>
			<p>“All the better,” I replied, gritting my teeth and shaking my fist in his face; “the rats will have uninterrupted opportunity to relieve you of your superfluous flesh. Oh, they are very hungry, I assure you, Herr Metaphysician, and they will speedily help you to sever the mysterious link that binds soul to living body. They will know how to loosen the individualized Ego from the fleshly surroundings. I congratulate you on the prospect of a rare experiment.”</p>
			<p>The cries of Professor Calcarius grew fainter and fainter as I made my way down the hill.</p>
			<p>Once out of hearing I stopped to count my gains. Over and over again, with extraordinary joy, I told the thalers in his purse, and always with the same result. There were just thirty pieces of silver.</p>
			<p>My way into the world of barter and profit led me through Cologne. At the barracks I sought out Fritz Schneider of Schwinkenschwank.</p>
			<p>“My friend,” said I, putting my hand upon his shoulder, “I am going to do you the greatest service which one man may do another. You love little Emma the inkeeper’s daughter?”</p>
			<p>“I do indeed,” he said. “You bring news of her?”</p>
			<p>“I have just now torn myself away from her too ardent embrace.”</p>
			<p>“It is a lie!” he shouted. “The little girl is as true as gold.”</p>
			<p>“She is as false as the metal in this trinket,” said I with composure, tossing him Emma’s ring.</p>
			<p>“She gave it to me yesterday when we parted.”</p>
			<p>He looked at the ring, and then put both hands to his forehead. “It is true,” he groaned. “Our bethrothal ring!” I watched his anguish with philosophical interest.</p>
			<p>“See here,” he continued, taking a neatly knitted purse from his bosom. “Here is the money she sent to help me buy promotion. Perhaps that belongs to you?”</p>
			<p>“Quite likely,” I replied, very coolly. “The pieces have a strangely familiar look.”</p>
			<p>Without another word the soldier flung the purse at my feet and turned away. I heard him sobbing, and the sound was music. Then I picked up the purse and hastened to the nearest cafe to count the silver.</p>
			<p>There were just thirty pieces again.</p>
			<p>To acquire silver, that is the chief joy possible to my new nature. It is a glorious pleasure, is it not? How fortunate that the soul, which took possession of my body in the Schloss, was not Socrates’s, which would have made me, at best, a dismal ruminator like Calcarius; but the soul that had dwelt in the grey rat till I strangled him.</p>
			<p>At one time I thought that my new soul came to me from the dead notary in the village. I know, now, that I inherited it from the rat, and I believe it to be the soul that once animated Judas Iscariot, that prince of men of action.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
